#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass docbook
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Sinhala Support in GNU/Linux HOWTO
\layout Author

Harshula, hash@jayasolutions.cjb.net
\layout Revision

v0.1, 2004-06-05
\layout Section

About This Guide
\layout Standard

This guide describes the level of Sinhala support available on GNU/Linux.
 It also describes tasks that still require attention.
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

The Sinhala support on GNU/Linux is still quite basic.
 Since Sinhala support is based on Unicode, there is already some level
 of support.
\layout Standard

There are a number of patches to support Sinhala floating around for many
 key parts of GNU/Linux.
 Unfortunately the patches still need to be integrated/submitted upstream.
 Then these updated packages need to be included in the latest versions
 of distributions.
 Hence there will be a significant latency between when the developer's
 work is finished and when an average user is able to benefit.
\layout Standard

During this period a user can, hopefully, use this HOWTO to check the current
 status of Sinhala support in GNU/Linux and how to enable better support.
\layout Subsection

Learning about Sinhala
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.speaksinhala.com]{http://www.speaksinhala.com}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.sinhalapage.com]{http://www.sinhalapage.com}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.ceylon-online.com]{http://www.ceylon-online.com}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Silva, A.W.L.
 (2003).
 
\emph on 
SINHALESE for Beginners
\emph default 
.
 Sri Lanka: Pubudu Printers Kandana
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

The first chapter has excellent coverage of the Sinhala letters.
\end_deeper 
\layout Subsection

Learning about Unicode
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.unicode.org]{http://www.unicode.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[UTF-8 and Unicode FAQ for Unix/Linux]{http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mgk25/unicode.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Section

Fonts
\layout Standard

Install a unicode font.
 eg.
 freefont
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.nongnu.org/freefont/]{http://www.nongnu.org/freefont/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[sinhala-fonts.zip]{http://www.metta.lk/fonts/sinhala-fonts.zip}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Immediately you'll be able to read Unicode Sinhala in these programs:
\layout Itemize

Anything gtk2 based
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

evolution
\layout Itemize

gedit
\layout Itemize

gucharmap
\layout Itemize

gvim
\layout Itemize

mozilla (built with gtk2 and FreeType2)
\end_deeper 
\layout Section

Input Methods
\layout Standard


\series medium 
To test multi-lingual input methods in gtk2 based programs, run 
\emph on 
testtext,
\emph default 
 which comes with gtk2.
\layout Subsection

Character Maps
\layout Standard

You can use a Unicode Character Map program to copy 'n' paste Sinhala characters
 into your program/document.
 Available programs are:
\layout Itemize

gucharmap
\layout Subsection

Keymaps
\layout Subsubsection

gvim
\layout Enumerate

Download the keymap from:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[sinhala-phonetic_utf-8.vim]{http://savannah.nongnu.org/cgi-bin/viewcvs/*checkout*/sinhala/sinhala/keymaps/sinhala-phonetic_utf-8.vim?rev=HEAD&content-type=text/plain}

\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Copy the keymap to ~/.vim/keymap/
\layout Enumerate

Start gvim
\layout Enumerate

Need to disable the menu so that you can use the 'alt' key.
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

set guioptions-=m
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Select the new keymap
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

set keymap=sinhala-phonetic_utf-8
\end_deeper 
\layout Subsubsection

X Keyboard Extension
\layout Enumerate

Download the keymap from:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset ERT
status Open

\layout Standard
<!-- http://savannah.nongnu.org/cgi-bin/viewcvs/sinhala/sinhala/keymaps/si
\layout Standard
-->
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Copy the keymap to /usr/X11R6/lib/X11/xkb/symbols/
\layout Enumerate

Edit the /etc/X11/XF86Config file.
 In order to add the new 'si' keymap, look for this line:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

Option "XkbLayout"
\layout Standard

Here's an example of what I've changed mine to:
\layout Code

Option "XkbLayout" "us,si"
\layout Standard

Also add key to switch between 'us' and 'si':
\layout Code

Option "XkbOptions" "grp:caps_toggle,grp_led:scroll"
\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Or alternately, in an xterm do:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

setxkbmap -rules xfree86 -model pc105 -layout "us,si" -option grp:caps_toggle
 -option "lv3:switch" 
\end_deeper 
\layout Subsubsection

xmodmap
\layout Enumerate

Download the keymap from:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset ERT
status Open

\layout Standard
<!-- http://savannah.nongnu.org/cgi-bin/viewcvs/sinhala/sinhala/keymaps/si.xmm
\layout Standard
-->
\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Then run xmodmap:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Code

xmodmap si.xmm 
\end_deeper 
\layout Section

Locales
\layout Section

Developers
\layout Subsection

Input Methods
\layout Standard


\series medium 
The usable infrastructure for keymaps 
\series default 
are
\series medium 
 xkb
\series default 
, 
\series medium 
gtk-im
\series default 
 and 
\series medium 
XIM
\series default 

\begin_inset Foot
collapsed false

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[Pango Input Resources]{http://www.pango.org/input-resources.shtml}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsubsection

Keymaps
\layout Enumerate

Wijesekera Compatible
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_1.html]{http://www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_1.html}

\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

ASCII Compatible Wijesekera
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_2.html]{http://www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_2.html}

\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Phonetic (Static)
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_3.html]{http://www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_3.html}

\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Enumerate

Phonetic (Dynamic)
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_4.html]{http://www.nongnu.org/sinhala/doc/keymaps/sinhala-keyboard_4.html}

\end_inset 


\end_deeper 
\layout Standard

A Sinhala Unicode Font has to be installed in order to read the Keyboard
 Maps.
 
\layout Subsection

Resources/Info
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[sinhala.linux.lk]{http://sinhala.linux.lk}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.nongnu.org/sinhala/]{http://www.nongnu.org/sinhala/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \htmlurl[www.jayasolutions.cjb.net/06fonts.html]{http://www.jayasolutions.cjb.net/06fonts.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Section

TODO
\layout Itemize

submit Sri Lankan locales
\layout Itemize

develop phonetic Sinhala keymap with justification
\layout Itemize

submit vim keymap
\layout Itemize

add Sinhala to /usr/include/X11/keysymdef.h
\layout Itemize

si Vs sl - Why are the Slovenians using 'si'?!
\layout Itemize

LyX - /usr/share/lyx/kbd
\layout Section

Conclusion
\layout Standard

Obviously there's still quite a bit to do.
\the_end
